---
layout: post
title:  "Politics"
date:   2015-06-26 12:28:01
categories: [section]
excerpt: The ultimate doctrine (which is something as imaginary as this guide) declares IIT-R to be a democratic institute. 
class: ch-img-6
cover: politics_cover.jpg
--- 	
--------------------------------

For thousands of years, the warlords of the galaxies lights years away have fought innumerable ruthless battles. Flaks have flown and natives have perished in the dark space. All of this for the Iron Throne of the Students Affairs Council (SAC) of the IITR cosmic space. It is said that the Iron 
Throne was studded with a thousand light sabers before being reluctantly replaced by a revolving chair due to multiple posterior problems reported by the delegates involved.   

The ultimate doctrine (which is something as imaginary as this guide) declares IIT-R to be a democratic institute. Here students have as much say as the administration when it comes to campus affairs. Which of course translates to very little. While discussions and debates pertaining to what to do with the freshly allocated funds _(hint: relay existing roads)_ and to whom should we let out the space in front of the students’ club _(hint: switch between two very similar retail brands)_ happen weekly; everyone knows that the final decision is taken by a green little infant enjoying this reality show from somewhere in the universe.

The Student Affairs Council is the body that represents student community in the IITR senate. If 
you have been a little late in reading this guide (and it’s been a few weeks already since you’ve 
been confined to Rajendra Bhawan premises), chances are you probably know how things work 
here. Student elections are the first major activity that the freshers are exposed to- just after 
their <s>ragging</s> intro-chapos. As the atmosphere starts getting politically charged, introductions 
are made, affiliations are expressed, ‘pacts’ are signed and  chapos are given. R is perhaps 
unique in this respect among all its sister IITs. While many of them have student 
representatives in their senate; very few have participation and enthusiasm on this grand a 
scale.

Like it or hate it; it’s almost impossible to be indifferent towards the poly season. Seniors try their best to act godfathers to their corresponding juniors. As swarms of 
perfect strangers start moving from door to door, reading out their manifestos from shabbily 
scripted paper cards; we won’t blame you if you are reminded of a Shyam Benegal political 
thriller. Their promises range from slightly laughable to excessively outrageous and usually tend 
to involve the terms _washing machine, geysers, washrooms, gym and chapo._

The SAC consists of student representatives at the bhawan level as well as the insti level. Every citizen (he who has an enrollment number) in R-Land gets to vote in the SAC elections. The positions at bhawan level are _Mess Secretary, Sports Secretary, Cultural Secretary, Technical Secretary and Maintenance Secretaries_(I & II) and voted by bhawan members. At the insti level, there are seven General Secretaries out of which five are elected by the whole student body and two nominated- _GS Academics( UG & PG), Technical Affairs, Alumni Affairs, Finance, Cultural Affairs and Sports._ 

The election season may also witness the enforcement of a hostel entry deadline by the administration restricting your very movements. Even your late night pee breaks and tea breaks might be looked upon with suspicion by the all seeing guards at hostels. If it seems like [Admiral General Aladdin](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dictator_(2012_film)>) holding elections in the Republic of Wadiya, it may not be too personal an opinion. 

To know more about politics at IITR, go through our [editorial on the revamped system](http://wona.co.in/2015/08/of-facts-and-pacts-2),  where we analyse this system in a much greater detail.