---
layout: post
title:  "Production And Industrial Engineering"
date:   2015-06-26 12:28:01
categories: [departments]
excerpt: 
class: ch-img-3
cover: academics_cover.jpg
--- 	
--------------------------------
_Production and Industrial Engineering is a sister branch of Mechanical Engineering. The
undergrads are basically Mechanical Engineers in making, only with an easier lifestyle and a 
larger number of female students in their batch._

An industrial engineer has wide knowledge of engineering practices and is aware of 
management challenges related to production. Most manufacturing houses look out for 
engineers who specialize in this field so as to reduce cost, increase efficiency and make their 
products marketable in this competitive era. P&I, as a branch, is offered only in IIT-D and IIT-R, 
along with a similar branch in IIT-KGP, making it all the more unique.

Production and Industrial engineering, as the name suggests, comprises of two different 
specializations. Production Engineering involves study and application of various manufacturing 
processes. There are practical and theoretical courses on Manufacturing Techniques namely 
Forming, Material Removal and Finishing processes and Tool Engineering. The course content is 
more theoretical rather than mathematical.

Industrial Engineering covers a very wide variety of subjects. It revolves around optimizing the 
time and resources available for a firm and running their operations. The subjects pertaining to 
the same are more mathematically intense than Production. Some courses in the curriculum 
are borrowed from Mechanical - Machine Drawing, Thermodynamics, Fluid Dynamics and 
Theory of Machines, to name a few.

On an average the workload is 20 hours per week, which gives a lot of time to the students to 
engage in extracurricular activities in the institute and carry out any research related activities 
in his/her area of interest.

Students can opt for MBA in Operations (or in general) or pursue MS in any field of Industrial 
Engineering (Analytics, Optimization, Facilities Systems and Network Planning, Stochastic 
Modelling and Simulation, Health Systems, Manufacturing, SCM, Operations Research).
For those interested in Production, the fields of research include Advanced machining, 
UltraSonic machining, Electro Discharge Machining, Submerged Arc Welding, Computer 
Numerically Controlled machining are the fields for research.

Not more than 10 on-campus offers for internships are offered. A lucky few get to do a fully 
funded research internship in Germany via DAAD, in Canada via MITAX, and in Japan via 
HondaYES+.

As far as campus recruitments are concerned, PI students are eligible for almost all data 
analytic and consultancy firms that visit the campus. Jobs opportunities are not scarce, but 
again, there is no free lunch. Roughly, the average pay scale is 6-7 lakhs.  

Students get placed in companies across various sectors: Oil and Gas (Shell, Schlumberger), 
FMCG(ITC), Automotive (TATA Motors, Hero MotoCorp, Anand Automotive, VE Commercials, 
Mahindra & Mahindra), E-Commerce(Flipkart, Snapdeal), IT(Oracle, Wipro) and other 
companies visiting the campus offering analytics role in various domains.

