---
layout: post
title:  "MSc Physics"
date:   2015-06-26 12:28:01
categories: [departments]
excerpt: 
class: ch-img-3
cover: academics_cover.jpg
--- 	
--------------------------------
_In the same building as the Mathematics department and bears an uncanny resemblance to the
same: Both these departments take in unemployable young geeks having a JEE rank that could 
not grant them civil or chemical; and turn them into unemployable young geeks who regret 
having a JEE rank that could not grant them civil or chemical. The entrance to the Physics 
department is also regarded by many as a wormhole hidden in plain sight: transporting 
unsuspecting entrants from a world of joy, togetherness and bun-samosas to one of misery, 
practical records and where you can’t talk inside laboratories._

####Course Structure

The structure of the undergraduate physics course offered at Roorkee 
consists of a package of standard undergraduate physics courses, designed to give a 
rudimentary understanding of most of the basic and popular areas of physics research to the 
students. Studies deal with condensed matter physics, nuclear physics, atmospheric and atomic 
physics. Recent changes have been reflected in new courses being floated,such as those in 
astrophysics, biophysics and quantum optics. 

However, it is not all about the flashy courses that you can do in your ultimate or penultimate 
year. Physics research is usually bottom up, and any researcher is expected to have a good 
understanding of physical theories such as special relativity, electromagnetism, quantum theory 
and classical mechanics. Students are supposed to take a number of compulsory courses in 
these, besides the whole shebang of specialized courses in condensed matter physics, nuclear 
physics, atomic and laser physics. Also, physics researchers are expected to have a sound 
understanding of the mathematics of the physical theories that they will tackle, and students 
are supposed to do compulsory courses or opt for electives, in mathematics. Calculus and linear 
algebra are vital and covered in the first two years, and more advanced topics are covered in 
the a mathematical physics course. There are also lab courses offered later, with specialized 
labs in the final year. They, however, leave much to be desired.

The department also offers courses in computational physics, which is vital to the skill set of 
any physics researcher. Languages such as MatLab, Mathematica and Fortran are usually 
taught, and students are taught to formulate and solve physical problems numerically. In the 
wider program of physics research, this has become increasingly important as both 
experimental and theoretical studies are turning to numerical calculations as a research tool.

####Fields of Research

Roorkee’s physics department has traditionally been a theoretical 
stronghold. We have a number of experienced faculty specializing in nuclear physics, 
condensed matter physics, atmospheric science and atomic physics. The new faculty has 
brought in experience in fields such as astrophysics, biophysics and solar cell research. There is 
an upcoming cutting edge lab in quantum optics, supposed to be operational soon, that is 
expected to produce quality experimental research once working. Students, especially 
undergraduates, have been known to participate in the department’s research activities. 
Undergraduates are usually not expected to do research, but there have been instances of 
students collaborating and even taking the lead on projects leading to publications. The 
department is usually forthcoming to such initiatives on the student's’ part.

####Internship opportunities 

Students, especially undergraduates, have ample opportunities to 
participate in active research during their summer and winter breaks. A number of summer 
fellowships have been awarded to students to work at prestigious universities and research 
institutions, both in India and abroad. Many senior students work with the researchers of their 
choice over the breaks, where they are exposed to an intensive research environment, 
experience they bring home to the benefit of their fellow students. There have been 
participants in exchange programs like the WISE (DAAD Germany), the SN Bose Scholars 
Program (USA) and the Mitacs Globalink Program (Canada), and other fruitful exchanges with 
some European universities. A number of students also participate in the IAS fellowship 
program, where they are paired with a leading researcher at an Indian university or institute for 
the summer. It is also common for students to participate in summer and winter schools and 
camps in specialized topics. A testament to the efficacy of such programs has been the number 
of publications that have come out of these projects, assuring us that the students have been 
exposed to quality research. This experience is vital in helping the undergraduates make an 
informed choice when opting for graduate school. A great experience working in the lab, or on 
theoretical or numerical projects has persuaded a number of skeptical students to opt to go to 
graduate school.  

####Opportunities after

Opportunities for students after graduation are varied. On the physics 
front, a doctorate degree is a necessity if the students want to be researchers. With the right 
profile, a Roorkee graduate can make it to top schools in the US and Europe. Recent graduates 
have made it to top Ivy League schools, and best research groups in Europe. It is also common 
for students to get graduate positions at top Indian research institutes. The curious mix of 
courses taught at Roorkee prepares well, the graduating students for life ahead as a physics 
researcher.

