---
layout: post
title:  "Metallurgial and Materials Engineering"
date:   2015-06-26 12:28:01
categories: [departments]
excerpt: 
class: meta
cover: meta_cover.jpg
--- 	
--------------------------------
_Meta, as it is termed in IITR lingo, is better known as the chemical engineering 
department’s poorer cousin. The metallurgical department undergrads are identified by 
their strong indulgence in the affairs of the institute and anything which isn’t even remotely 
related to their branch._

The ability to understand and manipulate materials and their properties is a key factor in any 
industrial process or technology. Metallurgy is a domain of materials engineering that studies the 
physical and chemical behaviour of metallic elements, their intermetallic compounds and their 
mixtures called alloys.

The Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Department is one of the most active departments in 
IITR, with multiple societies such as METES & Material Advantage Student Chapter, comprising of 
both students and faculty.

####INTERNSHIPS

Since the summer term after third year carries credits for an internship, it would be unwise to ignore 
this section. Broadly classified into three categories, namely, research, industrial and non-core, 
students can pursue their interests in this period to align their professional choices. Programs such 
as MITACS (Canada) and DAAD (Deutschland) provide well-articulated research options abroad. 
Since these programs are associated with high GPA caps, people opt for cold-mailing professors 
across continents with similar research interests and enough funding, for the coveted research 
experience. A faction of students look upon steel giants and other associated industries to grab any 
opening as a summer trainee. Apart from core ventures, people tend to go for interns in finance 
sector, consultancy and firms for designing & advertisements as well.

####RESEARCH 

Material Science has immense scope for research, and many graduates opt for Masters or PhDs in 
the subject of their choice after graduation. A lot of research is undertaken by the professors, in the 
department, in the self sufficient laboratories. 330+ scores in GRE along with impeccable research 
profiles have taken our graduates to top research laboratories such as those in Stanford University, 
UIUC, U of Wisconsin-Madison, Princeton etc.

####PLACEMENTS

The placements are satisfactory, albeit not good enough to make headlines. As far as the campus 
placements are considered, students are eligible for almost all data analytic and consultancy firms 
that visit in the 20-day window when the campus, quite ironically, reflects cold-war & bloodshed. For 
some years now, Roorkee has been witness to scanty participation by core industries for the 
Metallurgy and Materials Engineering Dept. but the numbers are expected to turn-around soon. Last 
academic year, the material division of Reliance was the only employer under the core category. 
About 85% of the registered students found a job in the last placement season. People were placed 
in consultancies such as ZS Associates, i3 consulting and several found a desk under the roof of IT 
houses such as Wipro & TCS. Few of our graduates were recruited by Flipkart, and banking & finance 
institutions such as Capital One, ICICI Lombard. There is abundance of opportunities for those who 
deserve them, but as the saying goes- _“thodi fight maarni padti hai!”_
