---
layout: post
title:  "Fests"
date:   2015-06-26 12:28:01
categories: [section]
excerpt: Surprise struck to the junta in the autumn of 2013 when Thomso’13 unexpectedly kicked-ass in each and every goddamn domain. Undoubtedly, the days of Thomso are probably the best time at the campus of IIT-R. 
class: ch-img-11
cover: fests_cover.jpg
--- 	
--------------------------------
###Cognizance  

Although it is the largest technical festival of Asia, calling it the 2nd largest technical festival of 
Asia is simply IIT-R being humble. Cognizance takes place in the Spring semester: just after the 
curse of mid-terms gets lifted from the lives of people. It invites eminent personalities from all 
over the world for guest lectures, workshops and stage-shows pertaining to the world to 
technology. The organizing team comprises of the students of IITR themselves. For both 
Thomso and Cogni, a modest structure of hierarchy exists while working. A typical freshman 
involved/pretending-to-be involved in the work can be identified by the following:  

1. Begging his facebook friends to like the Cogni page.   

2. Putting up posters in Bhawans.   

3. Undying devotion for any kind of Chapo from a senior.  

###Thomso  

The annual cultural festival of IIT-R, Thomso is the time of year when the uneven sex-ratio in 
the campus becomes hardly noticeable. It will be important to mention how bravely this festival 
survived before the unfortunate disaster of 2010 which led to its banning in 2011. However, it 
was re -launched with rigor in 2012 and people actually hoped that it was better to forget 
about the heavenly days again on campus.  

Surprise struck to the junta in the autumn of 2013 when Thomso’13 unexpectedly kicked-ass in 
each and every goddamn domain. Undoubtedly, the days of Thomso are probably the best time 
at the campus of IIT-R.  

###Sankalp  

Sankalp kicks off the trinity of fests in the spring semester. Sankalp is the socio technical fest, 
organized by NSS. Though in its nascent stages, it is replete with multiple events like panel 
discussions, case studies and guest lectures, underlining the message of social conscience.  

If you are a faccha in NSS, you will be hounded by your seniors to attend the aforementioned 
guest lectures and panel discussions, with dire threats of attendance hanging over your 
shoulders.  

It is mostly ignored by the rest of the campus.

###Sangram  

The official sports fest of IITR, Sangram offers the sports fraternity of IITR a reason to keep their 
spirits up after the InterIIT season ends. High spirited matches are marked by intense jeering 
and inventive name calling from the abundant IITR crowd granting you the illusory sense of 
fulfillment that you have done your part for the institute. It sees a healthy turnout from many 
north Indian colleges, IITs included and is utilized to give freshmen some much needed game 
time. Needless to say, regularity a month or two before the fest can land you a spot in one of 
the B teams and maybe give you your 15 minutes of fame.
