---
layout: post
title:  "Biotechnology"
date:   2015-06-26 12:28:01
categories: [departments]
excerpt: 
class: biotech
cover: biotech_cover.jpg
--- 	
--------------------------------
_The department of Biotechnology is perhaps one of the cleanest places of IITR. That’s primarily
because it’s got a new building. An urban legend says that the previous building caught fire and 
was left abandoned. There are many theories that surround the cause of fire but most of them 
make no sense._

_A typical biotech undergrad usually plans his industrial trip for whole two years. He spends the 
next two years posting the 4200 photos he took while on the trip, while also reminiscing about 
the trip to anyone who'll listen._

The most salient feature of the branch, apart from the glitzy new building and research labs as 
mentioned above, is the limited class strength, as compared to the other branches. This 
facilitates interaction amongst each other, as with the faculty members. Most of the 
coursework is focused on research based areas in biological sciences. The engineering part 
primarily comprises of courses from the Chemical engineering department.

The subjects can be broadly classified into two. Reasearch based and engineering based.
The former consists of Genetic Engineering, Cell and Microbiology, Immunotechnology, 
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Microbial Technology, Animal and Plant Technology, IPR and 
Bioethics, Nano-biotechnology, Food Technology and Drug Design; while the latter 
includes Bioreactor design, Fluid Mechanics, Bio-separation techniques, Principles of 
Bioreaction Engineering, and Enzyme Technology.

There are countless research fields in Biotech. Broadly the fields could be related to Cancer 
Research, Stem Cell Research, Infectious diseases, Immunological studies, Drug design, 
Neuroscience, Evolutionary Biology, and Bio-medical engineering.

Although the job opportunities in the core sector are limited after BTech, the scope widens 
immensely after specialization. You can choose between policy making in regulatory bodies 
(UN, FDA, FAO) of patent Law, academia or jobs as technical heads in biotech/pharmaceutical 
industry, and engineers in biomedical-instrumentation.

Owing shift of the focus of global research towards bioscience (especially in Europe, US and 
Canada), this branch provides endless opportunities to explore the global research paradigm 
and get international exposure. Some popular internship programs are Mitacs-Globalink 
(Canada), DAAD-WISE (Germany), VISERA(Vanderbilt University, US), Khorana Scholarship, OIST 
(Okinawa Institute, Japan), Duke University (US), Rockefeller (US) and University of Queensland 
(Australia). Apart from these, due to ample flow of funds in bioscience, a lot of professors 
accept international interns for a period of 2-3 months for summer/winter interns in their labs. 
TIFR, IISC, CMBL, CBRI, CDRI etc are some research facilities within India which conduct really 
good research and provide internships to biotech students. Engineering based internships are 
offered by pharmaceutical companies like Biocon, Cipla, Ranbaxy and Biozeen.

There are also numerous paper and poster presentation competitions and global conferences pertaining to the field. Undergraduate participation in these is limited, albeit not impossible if you are inclined towards research. 
Most students like to participate in coding/design based competitions as their co-scholastic 
interests vary.

