---
layout: post
title:  "Electronics and Communication Engineering"
date:   2015-06-26 12:28:01
categories: [departments]
excerpt: 
class: ece
cover: ece_cover.jpg
--- 	
--------------------------------
_Situated precisely 33.5 degrees to the right of the ECE circle, this department boasts of many 
things other than their inappropriately shaped EC tower. <br />
The professors of the ECE department are characterised by their fear, ruthless efficiency and 
almost a fanatical devotion to surprise quizzes. Since nobody expects their inquisition, the 
professors are known to declare surprise quizzes before hand and then surprise the students by 
not taking any.<br />
Although some people say that this department exists only to be belittled by its adjoining 
department, the writers of this guide are not in possession of any concrete proof to substantiate 
this and hence choose to dismiss this as mere speculation. Which is just a fancy of us saying: we 
don’t have any freaking idea._

This branch of engineering develops integrated circuits and printed circuit boards that can be 
used in devices like mobiles, computers, tablets etc. Electronics engineers design, fabricate, 
maintain, supervise and manufacture electronics devices. The applications are far reaching, 
ranging from communication and defense to the entertainment industry. In a nutshell, this 
branch deals with electronics devices and their software interfaces.  

The branch in itself, is too vast to pick upon specific topics, but Digital logic design, Analog 
circuits, Signals and Systems, Engineering Electromagnetics, Communication Systems and 
Techniques, and Digital Signal Processing form the core of the branch.  

With 3-4 hrs of self study per day an average student should be able to maintain a CG above 8. 
This branch is filled with subjects that require practice to excel at, like Signals and Systems, 
Electronic Network Theory, Digital Logic and Design to name a few. A strong background in 
Mathematics (mainly probability and statistics) would definitely help.  

Different fields of research within the branch include Communication Systems, Signals and 
Image Processing, Microelectronics and VLSI, RF and Microwave Engineering. ECE also opens a 
whole new spectrum of interdisciplinary research fields some of which include Mechatronics, 
Robotics, Biomedical Engineering etc. 
   
With a Bachelors degree in ECE a student can apply for a job in any of these sectors – 
Telecommunication, Hardware Manufacturing, Software Engineering/IT, Research & 
Development, Home Appliance and VLSI design etc, Television Industry, Power sector.  

The branch offers plenty of internship opportunities. One can get an intern in any field ranging 
from software development to hardware engineering. One can also apply for internships 
abroad at various foreign universities.

Co-scholastic activities form a very important part of anyone's resume. Interviewers tend to pay 
attention to this section, be it for internships or jobs. ECE offers a lot of opportunities to take up 
projects. Some small projects are included in the course structure. To take up a Departmental 
Project the student can go and talk to any faculty member, working on their field of interest, to 
guide them on their project idea.

Apart from that IITR has a number of student groups like the Electronics or Robotics section of 
the Hobbies Club that gives you an opportunity of working on different projects. For those 
interested in mechatronics or robotics there are groups like Robocon, ASME, FSAE etc. that 
participate in various competitions. If working in big groups is not your cup of tea, then there 
are various competitions like Texas Instrument Innovation Challenge (TIIC), Microsoft Imagine 
Cup etc in which you can participate in small teams.

