---
layout: post
title:  "Architecture"
date:   2015-06-26 12:28:01
categories: [departments]
excerpt: 
class: archi
cover: archi_cover.jpg
--- 	
--------------------------------
_Architecture (or Archi, as the inhabitants of this institution put it) is a branch unlike any other 
branch. The students (Archi waale) enrolled in this program are identified by their strong 
brotherhood, an unusual affinity to alcohol and presence of unnecessary chart papers in their 
rooms. Although it may sound a little incredulous, but this is the only branch that has healthy 
relations between its consecutive years. On the downside, however, there are certain cons that 
are best left to imagination.<br />
A typical architecture student can be identified by <br />
a) Presence of the most good-looking girls of the campus in their surroundings.<br />
b) Long lethal-looking, dark blue instruments in their hands in the morning._

Architecture is neither a core field of art and humanities, though aesthetics and social context are at its 
heart; nor is it a core field of science and engineering, though materials and structure are its back bone. 
Architecture, in a nutshell, is design. Everything else merely helps the design come to life. An architect 
should be creative and passionate enough to come up with an original idea, while also technically 
proficient enough to devise a structure for its implementation.

Design is thus the core subject of every architectural course at IITR. It is assisted by art based subjects 
like colour fundamentals, model making, basic design and applied arts, and science based theories of 
structural design, climatology, building construction and services. Introductions to many corollary fields 
like urban design, landscape architecture, interior architecture and computer aided design are also 
provided. Hard work, consistency and perseverance are the basic needs of the course, with students 
having to burn the midnight oil on a regular basis.

Most students learn softwares through independent initiative, or with the help of their seniors. What 
sets the Architecture department apart at IITR is the strong senior junior bonding. Juniors help the fifth 
yearites with their thesis project, organising themselves in informal groups fondly called as ‘Families’. 
IIT Roorkee regularly participates in the renowned NASA (National Association of Students of 
Architecture) Convention, where a multitude of architectural competitions are hosted. All the 
preparatory work, right from the selection of the site to the painstakingly hand drawn charts, is done 
exclusively by the students.

IIT Roorkee is home to the best architecture department in the country. The rich alumni network, 
ranging across multiple job profiles including architects, entrepreneurs, construction managers, interior 
architects, animation and graphic designers, digital design researchers, media Labs researchers, bears 
testimony to the same. The department remains well connected with the alumni through guest lectures, 
pep talks, informal get-togethers, or as visiting faculties. This is one of the reasons the department can 
boast of 100% placement for the last couple of years. These interactions also expose us to the 
professional world and its opportunities.

Studying Architecture at Roorkee is an entirely different ballgame. It might seem to be challenging at the 
outset, but rest assured, it will be a ride like no other.

